{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\f4\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Helvetica;}{\f35\fswiss\fcharset128\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial Unicode MS;}{\f37\fswiss\fcharset77\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica-Bold;}
{\f38\fswiss\fcharset77\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica-Oblique;}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset128\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}@Arial Unicode MS;}{\f256\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f257\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f259\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f260\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f261\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f262\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f263\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f264\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f296\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Helvetica CE;}
{\f297\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Helvetica Cyr;}{\f299\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Helvetica Greek;}{\f300\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Helvetica Tur;}{\f301\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Helvetica (Hebrew);}{\f302\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Helvetica (Arabic);}
{\f303\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Helvetica Baltic;}{\f304\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Helvetica (Vietnamese);}{\f608\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Western;}{\f606\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS CE;}
{\f607\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Cyr;}{\f609\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Greek;}{\f610\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Tur;}{\f611\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS (Hebrew);}
{\f612\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS (Arabic);}{\f613\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Baltic;}{\f614\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS (Vietnamese);}{\f615\fswiss\fcharset222\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS (Thai);}
{\f1798\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Western;}{\f1796\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS CE;}{\f1797\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Cyr;}{\f1799\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Greek;}
{\f1800\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Tur;}{\f1801\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS (Hebrew);}{\f1802\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS (Arabic);}{\f1803\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Baltic;}
{\f1804\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS (Vietnamese);}{\f1805\fswiss\fcharset222\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS (Thai);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}
{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 \styrsid14556939 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 \styrsid14556939 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 \styrsid14556939 page number;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid13437268\rsid14556939}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.6359;}{\info{\author Doug Donohoe}{\operator Doug Donohoe}{\creatim\yr2006\mo1\dy5\hr10\min39}{\revtim\yr2006\mo1\dy5\hr10\min40}
{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages9}{\nofwords1934}{\nofchars11026}{\*\company Donohoe Digital LLC}{\nofcharsws12935}{\vern24703}}\margl1440\margr1440 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot14556939 \fet0{\*\ftnsep 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14556939 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14556939 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14556939 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14556939 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14556939 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\fs18\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\insrsid14556939\charrsid14556939 \tab \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35 Donohoe Digital Proprietary and Confidential\tab \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35 Page }{\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs17\fs18\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\insrsid14556939\charrsid14556939 \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35  \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35 PAGE\hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35  }}{\fldrslt {
\cs17\fs18\lang1024\langfe1024\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\noproof\insrsid14556939 \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35 1}}}{\cs17\fs18\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\insrsid14556939\charrsid14556939 \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35  of }{\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs17\fs18\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\insrsid14556939\charrsid14556939 \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35  \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35 NUMPAGES\hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35  }}{\fldrslt {
\cs17\fs18\lang1024\langfe1024\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\noproof\insrsid14556939 \hich\af35\dbch\af35\loch\f35 9}}}{\fs18\loch\af35\hich\af35\dbch\af35\insrsid14556939\charrsid14556939 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\nowidctlpar
\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\f4\insrsid14556939 
This document describes the principles underlying the AI implementation for DD Poker 2.
\par 
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 Introduction}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par When someone
 buys a simulation product for poker, is their goal to play better poker against computer opponents?  Probably not.  They're probably looking to improve their game against real people.  If so, then it's important that they practice against players who pla
y realistically.  Sound poker strategy is an important part of any worthy computer opponent, but the players in a typical game rarely play that way.
\par 
\par To improve their chances in a real tournament, a player doesn't need an opponent that can beat them as much as they need an opponent that can }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 teach}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
 them.  Rather than opponents who never go on tilt, who never throw their chips around recklessly, and never grow tired or bored of the game, they need opponents who do all of those things, because that's exactly wha
t real people do.  Rather than advice on how to play a hand that's based on extensive and complex computations that the player can neither fully understand nor perform in their head, a player needs advice explained in terms of simple concepts that they ca
n apply at the table.
\par 
\par This document seeks to explain some of the concepts behind our efforts to make DD Poker 2 a world class teaching tool for tournament Texas Hold'em.
\par 
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 Comparison to Other Products}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par The AI in DD Poker 1 was built on a decision tree.  
\par 
\par Decision trees are weak for a few reasons.
\par 
\par 1. Good poker thinking doesn't map well to a tree.
\par 2. They are predictable, and inevitably have exploitable blind spots.
\par 3. Varying styles of play aren't easily represented.
\par 
\par The AI in Poker Academy (our most credible AI competitor) is built on modeling and simulation.
\par 
\par This approach can produce strong play, but has other weaknesses.
\par 
\par 1. It's difficult to learn from because it can't explain its decisions.
\par 2. Irrational behaviors of real human players can't be easily incorporated.
\par 
\par The AI in DD Poker 2 is designed the following priorities:
\par 
\par 1. Realism, to better prepare one for games with human players.
\par 2. Strength, to keep good players challenged, and encourage better play.
\par 3. Transparency, to explain decision-making in detail, for teaching purposes.
\par 4. Flexibility, to create configurations that represent different styles of play.
\par 
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 Poker Engine Structure
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par The AI in DD Poker 2 is basically a rule engine that considers many sem
i-independent influencers.  The result is a very flexible algorithm without structural blind spots, which can be enhanced and adjusted intuitively, can simulate irrational behaviors, and can support its decision-making with detailed explanations.
\par 
\par The proc
ess of making a decision is always basically the same; each valid outcome is assigned a score representing the accumulated weights of every rule, and the outcome with the highest score is recommended.  By presenting the individual contributions of each ru
l
e, a good basic explanation of the decision is possible.  This transparency is enhanced by the fact that the outcomes considered are tactical options, rather than poker actions with no associated intent.  Instead of considering simply whether to bet after
 the flop, the DD Poker 2 performs a separate evaluation for each of several basic motivations for betting; a bet for value, a continuation bet, a stone cold bluff, etc.
\par 
\par Where a bet amount is required, the winning outcome dictates a bet range, relative to 
a value that depends on the situation; the size of the big blind, the size of the pot, the size of the player's stack, etc.  From this range, a value is selected randomly, to avoid telltale betting patterns.
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Basic Decision Factors
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par Influences on the decision-making process fall into several broad categories.  The influence of each factor is determined by mathematical computations of varying complexity, many of which can be adjusted to represent different styles of play.
\par 
\par 1. Hand Strength
\par 
\par These factors range from simple pre-selected categorization of starting hands to computation-intensive analysis of the chance of drawing the best hand with cards to come, weighted with respect to hands likely to be held by remaining opponents.
\par 
\par 2. Current Situation
\par 
\par These factors include actions by each player so far in the hand, table position, pot odds, stack size, tournament strategy, and so on.
\par 
\par 3. Player Profiling
\par 
\par These factors account for patterns that have been recognized in the play of opponents still in the hand, and the table image that is likely to result from opponents performing similar analysis.
\par 
\par 4. Proclivity
\par 
\par These factors simulate tendencies that are common in human players, such as tendency to favor weak ace-blank hands, chase straights or flushes, get tired of folding and play weak hands, or go on tilt after catching a bad beat.
\par 
\par Each decision has a default outcome, which is assigned a benchmark score a
gainst which other outcomes are compared.  For example, in most pre-flop situations, the default outcome is to fold.  Without good reason to do otherwise, the AI will throw its cards away (except when unraised in the big blind of course, where the default
 is to check).  The engine computes a score for each possible alternative to the default outcome, such that a direct comparison can determine the recommended action. 
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 High-Level Situations
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par While the basic structure of decision-making is the same in most situations, certain high-level factors have such a profound effect that different rules may be appropriate.  In pre-flop play, the following high-level scenarios are treated differently:

\par 
\par 1. Button Small Big (BSB).  Player is the button with only the blinds left in the hand.*
\par 
\par 2. No pot action; player is under the gun, or all players to the right have folded.  Single limper ignored.
\par 
\par 3. Multiple limpers.  Two or more players to the right have limped in, calling the big blind.
\par 
\par 4. Raised pot.  One raise has been put in.
\par 
\par 5. Re-raised pot.  Pot has been raised and re-raised.
\par 
\par 6. Player's stack is very short in comparison to the blinds.  Harrington calls this the Red Zone, where almost any reasonable hand will do, and the only reasonable move is to push all in.
\par 
\par In post-flop play, the only distinction with a high-level effect on the logic is whether there has been pot action yet in the current betting round.
\par 
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 Basic Quantitative Measures
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Position
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par The poker literature is filled with advice on how to account for p
osition, but precise definitions of what it means to be in "early" or "late" position are rarely provided for situations other than a ten-seated table.  DD Poker 2 defines pre-flop position categories Early, Middle, Late, Small Blind, and Big Blind as fol
lows:
\par 
\par      * 10 Seats Occupied:\tab E E E M M M L L S B
\par      *  9 Seats Occupied:\tab   E E M M M L L S B
\par      *  8 Seats Occupied:\tab     E M M M L L S B
\par      *  7 Seats Occupied:\tab       M M M L L S B
\par      *  6 Seats Occupied:\tab         M M L L S B
\par      *  5 Seats Occupied:\tab           M L L S B
\par      *  4 Seats Occupied:\tab             L L S B
\par      *  3 Seats Occupied:\tab               L S B
\par      *  2 Seats Occupied:\tab                 B S
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 Similarly, post-flop position categories Early, Middle, Late, and Last are defined as follows:
\par 
\par      * 10 Players Left:\tab \tab E E E M M M M L L T
\par      *  9 Players Left:\tab \tab   E E E M M M L L T
\par      *  8 Players Left:\tab \tab     E E M M M L L T
\par      *  7 Players Left:\tab \tab       E E M M L L T
\par      *  6 Players Left:\tab \tab         E E M M L T
\par      *  5 Players Left:\tab \tab           E M M L T
\par      *  4 Players Left:\tab \tab             M M L T
\par      *  3 Players Left:\tab \tab               M L T
\par      *  2 Players Left:\tab \tab                 L T
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 
\par Pre-Flop Hand Strength}{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 Due to the lack of information about other players'
 hands, hand strength before the flop is based initially on simple hand selection rules.  According to the hand selection groups in use by the player, we can assign a base score between zero and one, where hands that are not included in any group get a sc
o
re of zero, and the strongest hands get a score of one.  This is supported in the Hand Selection features of DD Poker 2 by the hand strength slider for each group, which essentially assigns a value from 1 to 10.  If these strengths are translated to score
s in a linear fashion, such that hands in groups with strengths of 1, 5, and 10 get scores of 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 respectively.  Other adjustments for style of play and situational factors will modify this score.
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Post-Flop Hand Strength}{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par After the flop, it is possible to compute more accurate estimates of hand strength against remaining opponents, especially as their actions begin to reveal more information about their hands.  Three scores are computed for use in rule evaluation.
\par 
\par First, a Raw Hand Strength i
s calculated.  This score between 0.0 and 1.0 represents the current rank of the player's hand versus all other possible hands.  This score is of course a relatively weak representation of actual strength, since betting action before the flop can provide 
considerable information about what hands are likely to be held by remaining opponents.  For instance, an opponent who put in a large raise from early position before the flop is far more likely to be holding a high pair than two small unsuited cards.  

\par 
\par Fo
r each opponent, a table is computed that represents the best guess at the likelihood their betting behavior so far is consistent with each possible hand.**  This table is used to weight each hand in computing a Biased Hand Strength, which represents the 
current rank of the player's hand versus all }{\f4\ul\insrsid14556939 likely}{\f4\insrsid14556939  opposing hands.  
\par 
\par Last, if there are cards to come, a computation is performed to estimate the effect of the next card to be dealt, yielding a Biased Effective Hand Strength score.  Ideally this computati
on would be carried out for all remaining cards to be dealt, but this is too expensive to be practical, and has proven to have only a marginal impact on accuracy.
\par 
\par The difference between Raw Hand Strength and Biased Hand Strength can be regarded as the imp
act  on perceived hand strength of careful observation, and as such can be weighted to reflect a given player's observation skills.  The difference between Biased Hand Strength and Biased Effective Hand Strength is essentially a measure of the relative ri
sk of being outdrawn when ahead, or potential of drawing out when behind, and as such can be an important factor in betting strategy.
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Stack Size}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par When a player's stack is much larger or smaller than average, certain important strategic factors kick in.  DD
 Poker 2 uses a computation similar to that described in Harrington on Hold'em as "Effective M".  This measure essentially represents how quickly the player's stack will be blinded away, by taking into account the size of the blinds and/or antes, and the 
number of players remaining at the table.  This measure is used to activate or detect both desperate and bully play.
\par 
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 Multi-Hand Statistics}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par A number of statistics are accumulated by the AI based on what each player could observe of hands for which they were dealt.  This information is used both to predict and interpret the actions of opponents, and to self-profile in order to take advantage o
r
 caution from shifts in table image.  As a general rule, these statistics are maintained as a weighted average of true/false conditions.  In other words, each piece of information being tracked is a simple boolean evaluation (e.g. did the player voluntari
ly put money in the pot), with the results for more recent hands being weighed more heavily.  The result is a value that both represents long-term behavior but reacts quickly to shifts in style.
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Hands Paid}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par A good combined measure of looseness/aggression, this value indicates how often a player puts money in the pot voluntarily before the flop, by calling the big blind, calling a raise, or raising.  
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Hands Limped
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 A good combined measure of looseness/passivity, this value indicates how often, when given the opportunity, a player calls the big bet to limp into a hand.
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Hands Folded Unraised
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 A simple measure of tightness, this value indicates how often a player mucks their cards without calling an unraised big blind.
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Hands Raised Pre-Flop
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 A simple measure of aggression, this value indicates how often a player raises the pot pre-flop.  
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Post-Flop Rounds Played, Checked, Bet, and Raised
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 Statistics are kept on how often the player sees the flop, how often they check or fold when they do, how often they open the pot on the flop, and how often they raise.  Similar statistics are kept for the turn and the river as well.

\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Hands Over-Bet Post-flop}{\f4\insrsid14556939 
\par A simple measure of maniac or bully play, indicates how often a player puts in a bet larger than the pot , giving worse than 2 to 1 pot odds to the next player to act.
\par 
\par }{\i\f38\insrsid14556939 Hands Bet then Folded to a Raise or Re-Raise
\par }{\f4\insrsid14556939 A simple measure of how committed a player is to pots they bet into.  A high value may indicate frequent bluffing.
\par 
\par * BSB-specific strategies are not yet implemented.
\par ** Sophisticated hand probability weighting is in development.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f37\insrsid14556939 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }}